We said it's like Russian roulette with these chairs, because last time I interviewed Dave on one of these chairs, it just suddenly collapsed on him.
So we've had a little conversation about where the health and safety permit.
Also, you're a lot higher than I am, but that's all good.
I'll just look up to you.
Do you feel safe?
I feel really safe.
I can't put my...
I need an assistant.
And also, it keeps on randomly drifting this way, so...
It's a bit distracting, isn't it?
I'm ready.
It's OK.
Try not to move.
Morning, Dave.
Good morning, friend.
It's good to have you with us again.
I just want to frame what we're about to launch into because, as pretty much everybody in this room, but a few may not know, we are heading into our Centenary year here as a church.
And Skylark Church began with a lady called Rose Wibrow, who saw a group of kids playing outside
her window and her heart was moved with compassion and she just knew she needed to do something and so she opened her home back in 1926 and invited them in and began a Sunday school in her home and from that our church began and we have been thinking since the start of this year what legacy could we leave for generations to come if we
collectively and individually stepped into the story that God is continuing to write in and through this church.
And I think our beginnings are really important.
So as part of that series, when I heard the subject of your latest book, which has not yet been released, release date is when?
April the 20th.
And you guys are the very first people in the entire world to hear about here.
Come on!
Yes, you heard it here first, Skylark Church, that's pioneering and it's finest.
Let's hope you're not the last day.
Definitely.
Raising Generation Alpha is the title of your book and
I think that certainly in church circles lately, we have heard so much about Generation Z and about the quiet revival and how there's a whole heap of young adults kind of really encountering Jesus and hungry for a spiritual journey.
But nobody really is talking about Generation Alpha, are they?
They're not, and believe it or not, and I've had this conversation with John this morning, Generation Alpha is technically already finished.
Yeah, because we're already into Generation Beta at the start of 2025, and yet the church is not talking about this generation, which is really the heart behind the book.
Come on, and that's such a good heart behind the book.
There's so much that resonated with me as I read the book.
I parents to children who fall into Generation Alpha, so I felt encouraged and challenged in equal measure.
I think I've highlighted about 75% of what I read.
And I don't know that we'll be able to cover all of the questions that I have for you today.
But what my heart would be that as we sit here today, whether we have any relationship to someone in Gen Alpha or whether we feel fairly removed from that, we would understand that this is an important part of the legacy that we can write into the future.
Yeah, it's huge.
It's the heart of God, isn't it?
Come on, exactly.
So let's dive in, shall we?
Yes.
The opening few paragraphs of your book has this beautiful little phrase, generation alpha needs you and you need them too.
And that kind of sums up the core message of the book for you.
So can you just begin by framing the essence of the book and why it should matter to us as the church with the capital C to have a better understanding of generations in general and then particularly gen alpha?
Yes, so if you think about it, the heart of God
is multi-generational.
So when God introduced himself to Moses, Moses did not have a clue who God was until he said, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
So we serve a multi-generational God, don't we?
Absolutely.
And then we think about what is the heart of God for us as the church?
Well, God clearly commands us throughout Scripture.
When you begin to read about generations, you find it everywhere, all from the Old Testament to the New.
And God tells you and me that one generation will tell the story of God to the next.
So there's something about the storification, which is a word I've never used before, of the next generation, that is happening wherever not we like it or not.
So we have to make a decision as the church whose story is going to be told to generation alpha.
And we have to believe that it is the story of God, not the story of culture.
And I guess furthermore that if you wanted to
really mess up with the kingdom of God.
One of the greatest things that you would do is sorry to kind of teach you a hack of how to beat this all up here is that you would actually try to disrupt generations and you would get them speaking against each other and you would try to disconnect them because if you can disconnect generations then you disrupt in the story of God being told to the next generation.
So therefore we as the church
we have to be actively engaged in what God is doing in the next generation.
And I think there's been so much fear when we think about the next generation.
Let's be honest, abdication.
Let's be honest, if we're not talking about generation alpha and it's finished, maybe we need to kind of hold our hand up and say, maybe there's something in this for us of saying, God, how can we best serve this next generation?
And ultimately we have a Jesus who was incredibly
passionate about children, incredibly passionate.
And in fact, when he cleared the temple, what happened?
He got rid of all the rubbish.
He got rid of all the religion.
And he allowed the children to confront and censor of the house of God.
And when he allowed the children to confront and censor the house of God, they began to sing.
And Jesus said, out of the mouths of children, you have ordained praise.
And if you go back into the Old Testament where Jesus is quoting from,
That scripture is a warfare-based scripture.
It's actually in the context of when you're going to war, you have to put the children out front, and the children's voices need to be heard first, and that is an act of war.
So if we want to move forward in advance to the kingdom of God, we have to put children front and centre, and we have to allow them to be who God's called them to be, and that's how we extend the kingdom of God.
I mean, wow.
Mind blown.
Love that.
Just for the benefit of those who have not yet read your book or even researched Generation Alpha, can you just explain who Generation Alpha are in terms of years?
And then just a little snapshot of your acronym, which is actually sort of the key behind the book, A-L-P-H-A.
So Generation Alpha children born from 2010 to 2024.
It's probably worth giving a huge caveat that whenever you look about generational thinking, it is this crossover.
Even as I put this out on Facebook this week, people are going, well, I believe that Generation Alpha talks in 2011, that's fine.
It doesn't really matter.
The whole point, what's interesting is it's generational research
that comes from the Crindall Research in Australia.
And the reason they named Generation Alpha was they got to the end of the alphabet, remember?
So we had Generation X, Generation Y, or Millennials, Generation Z.
And then they were like, do we just start again with A?
And they came to the conclusion by looking at culture that we weren't just in a different chapter.
We were in a different library altogether.
So we have to change the very language.
So that's why they moved the alphabet and became Generation Alpha.
I mean, that in itself is phenomenal, isn't it?
It's why we need to talk about them.
I did about two years' worth of research, and obviously a lot of my background is working with children and young people.
I also have a generation alpha kid myself, and she's in charge of my household.
Wonderful.
What a blessing.
And basically came up with this acronym to try to communicate what's going on for this generation.
And maybe some of the gen alphas in the room will be able to affirm or deny this later.
So it's great to have you guys in the room today.
And effectively, this generation are, A, anxious
B, leading influencers, P, pandemic impacted, H, hyper-connected, and A, AI-shaped.
And that really forms the whole basis of the book.
So we've got the most anxious-minded generation in the whole of history, one in four meet the criteria for an identifiable mental challenge or illness.
We've got leading influences where two-thirds of them want to buy from businesses that will make a huge difference in the world and they want to be actively involved.
We've got pandemic impacted where 84% of parents believe that COVID and Generation C, as they're often called, will have a huge impact on the future of Generation Alpha as it has in all of us.
We've got hyper-connected, so we've got 100% of
generation alpha will lead 100% digital world and this is the way the world has gone and it's going and then we've got AI shapes where 65% of generation alpha kids will work in jobs that do not yet exist.
Okay so that's it's fascinating isn't it to hear that and
Dave, you write, when we understand the world that shapes each generation, we can disciple them with greater intention.
And I love that, because actually, the more that I read about those five traits that you have earmarked for that generation, and I realize it's probably not an exhaustive list, but those are the five kind of headlines.
It helped me think, oh, this is helpful to even know how I can disciple my own kids better, let alone lead a church that is geared towards and empowering that generation to take their place.
Now, I want to move as much as I can into those five areas and my hope is that we have time to cover them all because I feel like we'll miss out if we
if we don't but starting then some of the stats in your book are they're pretty staggering and when it comes to the first defining feature anxious-minded it makes pretty sobering reading to be honest and I realise that we've got some of our youth in the room today and we're going to offer you hope
in this conversation.
The purpose of us sharing some of these stats and not to make anybody feel afraid.
It may be triggering in places, but we're here to support you in that.
But it's important that we understand the reality that we're walking into so that we can also find the hope.
And there's so much hope that comes out of your book and so much hope for this generation.
So one of the quotes that I picked up about this, you said, today's young people
are the most anxious minded in all history.
Can we unpack this some more together?
What signs can we look out for when it comes to anxiety in gen alpha kids, particularly when it comes to thinking, language and behavior?
And what are some of the contributing factors behind this epidemic of anxiety?
So it is so ring, isn't it?
And it's important to recognise we're not talking as therapists today and we're talking about generalised anxiety and also recognising that there's a huge amount of diversity in terms of backgrounds and neurodiverse in the room.
So when we talk to, let's just, we're going to talk generally from what the stats are saying and what the culture is reflecting.
So I believe that we are expecting children to deal with adult sized problems
with in childlike brains using childlike tools.
Simple as that.
So we are, there has been a cultural mission to eradicate childhood.
Right, I would concur with that.
So that's the context that we're talking in and you can see me get angry now because that is the context and it is a work of evil to try to eradicate childhood.
because how can we serve children when we say that children don't exist in the first place?
So people think that if you can blur the boundaries so much that everybody's an adult and we're all okay.
So because those boundaries have been blurred, what happens is, one of the phrases which I don't use in the book, which I wish I had, is anxiety is like an onion.
It has lots of layers and sometimes it makes you cry.
And if you think about the layers that young people are facing today, they are plentiful.
There is more pressure
on the academic achievement in school than ever before.
And schools are not the same places that you and I grew up in.
I work with schools, and I know that they are incredibly challenging places to learn.
Often for young people, school is about survival, not learning.
That's the context of learning it.
And what's happened is, because schools offer a one-size-fits-all criteria, and then say that if you don't fit the something wrong with you, rather than something wrong with the system,
Hello.
What we have is young people are a tremendous amount of pressure when it comes to academic performance.
Secondly, relationships are harder than ever before.
Actually, having friendships, we've lost the skills to have great relationships and great friendships that are becoming more fractured, more broken than ever.
And the online world has made that worse, not better.
So often when I'm talking with my daughter and she's saying, Dad, I said this to my person or I'm having this
upset or arguing with his friend and I'm like, so what did they say to you?
I said, oh no, they didn't say anything.
They watched that me.
So for this generation, the digital and online offline ones, they're interchangeable.
There's no distinction between the two.
So we have to recognise that causes a degree of anxiety and pressure.
And there's no switch off, is there?
There's no switch off.
You never get away from it.
So, you know, you have all these compounding issues, whether it be social comparison, social media, screens.
You know, the kind of like the world that we live in is becoming scary and scary.
Let's be honest, for an adult, it is challenging.
And young people have been early exposed to all these things, and we're not helping equip them with the tools to be able to deal with it, because we're not talking about it.
So that's the context here that we're living in.
And I think, in one sense, it's the same with all generations, isn't it?
And we can talk about how we begin to tackle it if you want briefly.
But I think one of the things that I really feel very strongly about, because it's quite a negative label to say anxious minded, but it's so important to recognize that this is the culture and the sea that young people are swimming in today.
So you might as well tackle it first, if that makes sense.
Definitely, it's just pulling the plaster off, isn't it?
And naming the reality that they face day in, day out.
It would be nice to know, firstly, I suppose, how
do we pick up on that in terms of behaviour, language, thinking?
But also, what kind of tools can you equip us with to help lead young people towards a place of peace?
OK, so I think what we want to be doing is looking for when a young person's world begins to shrink to the point where problems become bigger.
and I think all of us face anxiety different times.
Anxiety, if you think about fear, fears like a match, so you light the match and fear occurs in rightly, so it's actually, you know, if you're walking by the side of a cliff, you need to feel fear of a wise, you'll fall off it, right?
So the match is supposed to get lit and then it burns out when you move away from the side of the cliff, job done.
Anxiety is like a bunch of matches that have been thrown into your heart
One of them has been triggered off, now all of them are going and we can no longer identify where the origin of that thing came from and it just doesn't stop.
That's anxiety.
That's such a helpful analogy.
So I think for us as parents, as those educating, raising the next generation, we want to be looking for when does this become overwhelming and whether there's
Avoidance behaviors happening whether this kind of behaviors where they begin to act a little bit odd Why why is this rather than?
We've mentioned this at the sky laughing rather than mean furious about it become curious about it So one of the first things we can do is enter the world of a young person Put ourself in their shoes and I begin to ask good questions about what's really going on rather than just judging the behavior and
Because you might be thinking that Paul would behave.
And this happens in schools.
All the time, as we know, Emma, is that we call it Paul behavior, but really it's just a coping mechanism.
So we want to be a bit more curious about what's going on and look for it.
And there's a tool that I can teach us in one minute.
Yes, please.
And I decided that I'm going to use a real life kind of vulnerable example of this, OK?
Great.
So last night, I was sat at the dinner table, and I began to feel very, very anxious about today.
And I'm not normally somebody that gets nervous, but I began to feel really, really nervous about today.
And I actually shared it with my family.
I said, guys, can you pray for me?
Because I just feel really nervous about tomorrow.
I didn't know why.
So then I went for a walk, as some times do.
And the Holy Spirit dropped into my heart.
You need to apply the model from your book.
Thanks, Lord.
My relationship with Jesus is interesting as ever.
And there's a little model that we use in the book called The Sea, which stands for situation, emotion, evaluate.
Really simple.
And in essence, it's based on this idea that you examine the situation.
So for me, the situation was, I'm coming to Skylark to speak in front of lots of people.
I do not have notes in front of me, and it's the first time I've talked about this book.
That's Matthew.
Emotion, I feel anxious.
The anxieties manifesting in my shoulders, I feel tight in my stomach and my hands are starting to shake and I'm distracted from everything else.
Evaluate.
And this is where it gets really interesting.
So on my walk, I began to evaluate why was I feeling anxious?
And it's because I was believing some things.
I was believing that I wasn't enough to be able to share this topic.
I'm not an expert in it.
I'm not a psychologist.
I'm not a kind of researcher.
I began to, I believe that people would just think, oh, Dave's out to sell another book again, which by the way, I have a day job.
So thank you very much.
I'm not doing this for many.
And I began to believe all these negative things that I was not enough.
Second part of evaluation is you replace that negativity with the truth of the word of God.
And this is what happened.
I reminded myself of three very simple things.
Number one, God told me to write this book.
Number two, I really believe this book will help people.
And number three, and you'll like this one, church.
Skylark are my family.
Yay!
No word of a lie within 10 seconds, 90% of my anxiety had gone.
Wow.
Because I replaced fear with the truth.
And what happens when we have truth, the truth does what?
That's us three.
So that is one way we can really help our children process.
That is great.
S-E-A-C. S-E-A-C.
It's just literally situation.
What's going on?
What are you feeling?
And remember, it's not what happens to us that makes us anxious.
It's what we believe about what happens to us that makes us anxious.
You change the belief, you change the feeling.
And that's vital, isn't it, actually?
When we think about, you know, the Bible tells us about renewing our minds.
The bit that needs renewing is the belief system that underpins all of our emotions, all of our thoughts.
And so often we just have a faulty belief somewhere in there, often about ourselves or about things that we feel can't be changed, or about God.
So I love that.
And it can be dealt with so quickly with young people as well, and you can help them process through it.
It works.
That is beautiful, Dave, thank you.
And I know that actually there's loads more that you say, loads more tools that you give in the book, which we don't have time to go into now, because I want to move us into this next attribute, generation alpha being leading influences.
And this made my heart sing.
This is a generation that you describe are yearning
to make a difference.
They want to get involved with issues of social justice.
They want to create content and not just consume it.
And I want to say that as a church leader that makes me want to weep because for too long the church has been a spectator or a consumer culture and it has to change.
It has to change.
So to have a generation that wants to create content and not consume it makes my heart so happy.
And I want to quote you and it's a long one but it's a
really good one.
It's this, the goal isn't for gen alpha to build their own kingdoms but to become captivated by gods, one where fairness, love and justice reign, where innovation serves the common good and creation is cherished.
where online and offline spaces overflow with empathy and kindness and where every life is valued and compassion.
is a daily practice.
Wow, I just feel like this is so important for us to grasp.
Can you tell us more about Jen Alpha's leading influence and how it can shape the way that we disciple and assist these kids to thrive?
Yeah, so you think about it.
In every area of young person's life now, they have access to be able to create and do things except for two big areas, number one school and secondly, probably church.
So that really causes a bit of a challenge when we have... Mancibly.
Participators, not consumers.
They do not want to be consumers yet, so often we default to making them consumers.
And one of the big changes that are shifted in society is the difference between MTV and YouTube.
So as someone who's a Gen Xer, I don't know why I'm looking at Stu all the way here.
Could be any Gen Xer in the room.
So MTV was the big thing, right?
MTV was the thing where they decided and curated what was good.
They polished it up, they perfected it, and they programmed it in a way that they delivered to you the best of the best.
And they said, this is what young people want and what they believe.
In the early 2000s, YouTube started.
And MTV had the opportunity to buy YouTube, but they looked at YouTube and they said this, nobody would ever be interested in hearing from somebody who's not a celebrity.
Nobody would ever be interested in homemade content that wasn't perfected.
Oh dear.
Nobody is ever going to be interested in something that isn't the best of the best.
In May last year I went to Milan and I went to a museum in Milan and no word of a lie.
I saw the MTV logo in that museum.
MTV is now a relic of the past.
lost its relevance because it failed to understand that the next generation do not want to consume they want to produce.
Come on.
And I'll tell you a story, Nikki, that illustrates this.
I lead a Christian organization called Grace Foundation, and we work in schools.
A few weeks ago, one of my team said, Dave, you need to come to our Christian Union.
And I love being in the school.
So I said, I'll come to your Christian Union.
I walked in this room at lunchtime on just a Tuesday,
afternoon.
The room was packed full of 30 young people, and my first thought honestly was, I've come to the wrong place.
And I sat down, they said, Dave, this is the Christian Union.
For the next half hour, I watched 15-year-old and under leading this session.
It was on loving others.
And the young person, there was a non-Christian kid and a Christian kid who was a Catholic leading the Christian Union.
The non-Christian began to say, today we're going to talk about
Jesus is teaching on loving and others.
And he began to teach about what Jesus said from the Bible using scripture.
He then halfway through stopped and said, the non-Christian, I just wanna say that this thing that Jesus said, I have never felt the love of God like I felt when I'm in this room with you guys.
All the young people clapped and cheered.
And then the Christian stands in, he says, why don't we now discuss in groups how we're gonna love each other this week?
And then at the end, a young person puts their hand up and says, I need to say something here, I need to say something.
To be honest with you, if we are really going to put this Jesus thing into practice and love other people, then we need to start loving our teachers too, don't we?
I was there for half an hour, no adult said a word.
That is what God is doing with this generation.
Come on, love that.
That's generation alpha in a nutshell.
And we have to give them room to do it.
Woo!
Yes!
Yes, yes, yes.
And before I move on, I do want to also touch on some of the issues that they are passionate about and how...
I mean, I can see it with my own daughters.
They are passionate about creation care and climate change.
This is going to impact them enormously.
And I know that I get called out.
If I'm not doing my recycling right,
Honestly, they are on it.
But there are a number of justice issues that they are super passionate about.
Inclusion has always been a part of their vocabulary, their language, they care passionately about that.
Can you just unpack for us so that we, as adults, can kind of model something better?
Yeah, I think one of the interesting stats and research pieces that you find is that Jen Alfer are carrying a weight of expectation that they've got to fix
the problems that adults left for them.
So no wonder they're anxious, right?
Right.
But actually, there is a sense what was interesting with Generation Gen Z, there's the whole Greta Fumberg was, I'm going to make the difference, I'm going to go out and do it, right?
So Greta said, I'm going to change the world for climate.
What's happening with Gen Alpha is that they're pointing the finger back, and I think rightly so towards big business, and saying, hang on a minute, you caused this mess, you need to fix it.
So one of the big things that Jenelle for a very passionate about is what corporations do and how they make a difference in the world.
And then we bring it into the church as well.
So how much do we care about creation care?
My son really challenged me the other day.
I was using chat GPT for something and he said, Dad, how do you feel about the fact that every time you ask chat GPT something, it uses a cup of water?
And actually, there's a huge energy crisis emerging in the world over use of AI.
So he was really challenging me and going after me about that.
And I kind of used some excuse.
And then later asked AI how to handle it.
And get through it.
So they're passionate about what's going on in the world.
And they are using tools like they're buying power, like big business, to actually make a difference.
The other thing is protest is a major thing.
So in 2023,
A bunch of teenagers, they rebelled.
It was all of the news in the UK called the toilet riots.
Do you remember this happening?
The great toilet riots were 2023, where in essence, young people didn't like the idea that they had to ask permission to be able to go to the bathroom.
And they coordinated across WhatsApp and Snapchat, across social media, and organized human right violation protests.
And maybe even some of you guys in the room remember that, and they walked out.
Now, that was then kind of dull, and it's interesting how adults are like, yes, we want to hear the voice of the young person until it affects their toilet habits.
And at that point, we're like, yeah, yeah, but not that.
And I'm really surprised.
And if I'm going to predict the future in more way, I do believe we're going to see more of this as gen alpha come to fruition.
We will see more mass organized protests by children and young people using digital social media that is going to give us some things to think about because half the time they might be right.
Wow, that's brilliant.
I love that too.
Moving on, because we need to.
Are we on the L?
We're on the P. You talk in the book about people in our generation being able to remember where they were when 9-11 happens.
And actually, I remember because I was in my very first job after university and I was working for a media company.
hit.
It was all over the TV in our foyer.
We all were sent home.
And I'm sure each of us can probably remember if you're part of that generation.
But you made the point that the pandemic
was this seismic moment for Gen Alpha.
And I know that COVID impacted all of us, but it impacted Gen Alpha disproportionately in what were very formative years for them in terms of attachment, in terms of security, in terms of socialization and education.
And you actually refer to it as Gen Alpha's cultural milestone, which I think is a really good way to articulate it.
So how did the pandemic affect this generation?
How can we speak into that?
and love and lead them forward in a post-pandemic world.
Yes, when was the last time you heard about the pandemic?
Why is nobody talking about it?
So we as adults, we've intentionally moved on and yet we've left young people, not again.
not having the tools to be able to process it.
We've kind of conveniently eradicated that, which we don't want to look at.
Genuinely, like we don't talk about it as the church.
And do you remember the new normal?
Do you remember that?
Yes.
Do you feel like God's reading it?
Well, we're now in that new normal and it feels a lot like before in our minds, yet the world's totally different.
So 9-11 was that moment that came and it was cultural milestone for the millennials.
And what happened is after 9-11, the world changed.
in so many different ways, and we're still living out the consequences of that.
Same thing for the pandemic.
So the world has changed, and yet we're not really talking about it.
And one of the ways that it's changed is about lagging and learning, like the learning and developmental for young people.
They missed many, many years of learning.
So I read this bizarre stat the other day, which you won't believe, but it is true, is that nine out of 10 teachers would say that children are coming into school nowadays, and they don't know how to use a book
Now what I mean by that is they're coming into school and they're getting a book and they're tapping on the book.
They're tapping it and they don't understand why it's not interacting and responding back to them.
So that's not read a book, that's use a book.
So this is all part of that development or time that happened during the pandemic.
I think it was Damien, Damien who, this poet Damien, he talked about this idea.
Good morning to you.
Greetings, Janelle, for child.
We bless you in the name of Jesus.
We've read this poem, we basically said that we're all in the same storm, but we're not all in the same boat.
And young people's experience of the pandemic was incredibly different depending on what boats you were in, not depending on home life.
So, you know, there's a lot of anxiety, challenges that are going on for home, like some of the stats from what went on in homes.
during the pandemic was frightening around domestic violence, around a mental health anxiety for parents, and also then the connection of schools.
So globally, nine out of 10 parents globally report they had zero contact with their school after the pandemic kicked in and the lockdowns happened, zero.
So we've got this whole kind of scenario where people have been left to their own devices figuratively and literally.
left to process it and then afterwards we're dealing with the consequences of it.
So have you noticed that the world just feels more fractured than it ever did before?
Definitely.
Have you noticed that trusting institutions is at an all-time low?
Because we trusted them to deal with the pandemic and what happened when they were hypocrites?
Who do we then turn to?
Have you noticed that the job market has radically changed since the pandemic?
Things are just very different.
So I guess the key thing here is to recognise that in this cultural milestone, I think we as adults probably need to be talking about it more than we are.
That's really helpful.
And as a result of that, then we can help young people process or deal with the consequences of what went on for them.
So good.
I wish I could talk to you more about that.
But I want to get into the next part because... H. I.D.
This is a generation who's grown up surrounded by screens, social media, influences and algorithms designed to shape how they see and feel about themselves.
Can you enlighten us more on the helpful and the harmful aspects?
Because it's not all bad when it comes to hyper connectedness and gen alpha.
Yeah, so hyper connected world that we live in.
I mean, let's start with the good.
Like the opportunities and possibilities are incredible.
If you want to learn anything, and I mean anything, you can learn anything.
I have friends on the other side of the world who I'd call my close friends because of social media and because of the access that the internet gives me to them.
The opportunities to be able to play incredible games.
When I was a kid, I played Sonic the Hedgehog.
It was a one-player game where you went from the left to the screen to the right of the screen and you pressed the button and you jumped and collected rings.
Wow.
These guys are living in immersive worlds where they get to build and create things.
What I call a video game is not a video game.
Let's first make that straight, right?
So there's this opportunity to build.
I mean, yesterday my kids were on Animal Crossing.
I mean, what on earth is Animal Crossing?
But it was immersive, it was fantastic, and they were connecting with their friends, and it was downright fun.
So the ability to be able to build and collaborate and do stuff in community is fantastic.
I mean, there is one gen alpha trend, which I do not understand, and maybe some of the guys in the room can explain it to me afterwards, is that I get bored watching computer games when I'm not playing them.
But now, AR of 10 gen alpha will go on to YouTube.
And watch over children playing video games.
I do not understand this at all.
Help me, Lord, understand this next generation.
Maybe we're not become so disconnected.
We can't reach them, Lord.
We just don't get it.
It's crazy, right?
It's baffling.
It's an actual thing.
Yeah, yeah.
Every young person in the room is thinking, they're so old right now.
Because it's just the war everyone's swimming in, right?
So it's amazing and incredible.
But at the same time, our hyper-connected kids have become hyper-vulnerable.
Right.
So we're now exposing young people to screens from a very early age and AI, which I'm sure we'll touch on as we begin to finish, is that there has been an abdication of human connection in exchange for digital connection.
And what that's done is hugely impact
the very fabric of our relationships and the very nature of child development.
So young people have early exposure, you know, stats will say Jung is nine watching pornography or exposed to pornography.
The reality is we're dealing with Jung is seven, six, six, seven for the Jen Alphas in the room.
See what I did there.
And you know, that exposure to stuff, like really horrific horrendous stuff is the norm.
So at the start of my book, which you can read, you can download the first chapter on the website.
I talk about this girl, Olivia.
And I go through all these things that Olivia faces.
And it's challenging and it's horrendous.
And she's sending pictures to people.
And she's been exposed.
She doesn't know who to talk to about it.
So she goes to a chat bot and Snapchat on a cracked phone.
And Snapchat basically tells her, don't worry about it.
And she believes that because she's got no adult that she trusts.
So she goes through all these horrendous things.
So by the first two free paragraphs on my book, you're exhausted and then it hits you with the line, Olivia is 11 years old.
Right.
That was like a punch in the guts when I read that.
And even now every time I read it.
There's this exposure and hyper vulnerability that's happening.
And Miriam Kate, who's a Christian politician, she said this.
She said, in years to come, people will look back on the way we've given children unfettered access to technology and the internet in the same way that we look on mothers who were smoking and children down the mines.
And this is the reality of what we're facing.
And again, the church is not really talking about it.
Right.
You know what?
That is so true.
I want to just pause in that moment for a second.
So I think we need to feel that, don't we?
We actually need to pause for a second and feel that.
We sang a song in the worship practice this morning, maybe we'll do it at the end.
And it's where basically in the bridge, my favorite bridge of all time, it says, break my heart for what breaks yours.
And we have to put ourselves in the shoes of these young people and say, Lord,
We were never exposed to this stuff in the same way.
To access pornography as a millennial, you had to go to the shop and you had to go to the top shelf, right?
Right.
And nowadays it's at the click of a button.
And don't tell me that you can add all these kind of filters and things on to stop it, because every single young person I know knows how to download a VPN.
And in fact, as soon as the access to pornography sites in this country where the age verification came in that day, I don't know if you know, the number one trending app was a VPN app.
So this teenage is down on apps to bypass things that adults are put in place for them.
So we have to
recognize that no matter what safeguards you put in place, there's still the challenges there for the next generation.
However, this is where we're going to get into a bit of hope.
Come on, let's talk some hope.
Because I genuinely believe that the things that the internet offers that are good, that can be helpful, but can lean to harmful, are the very things that God has called us as families and communities to offer young people.
Right.
So young people are trying to answer free questions, free big questions.
Every teenager wants to know.
Number one, who am I?
That's the question of identity.
Number two, what am I here for?
That's the question of purpose.
Number three, where do I fit?
That's the question of belonging.
Identity, purpose and belonging is the question of every generation of our advocate and doesn't the gospel and the church answer that beautifully.
That is the question.
It isn't the place where belonging can truly exist.
We have abdicated parenting responsibility to Alexa.
Alexa now tells us bedtime stories.
Yeah.
and make silly noises and tells us dad jokes, that's for the dad.
And I genuinely believe that we as the church have this hope that's found in Christ and this hope that's found in community where we have young people and when we talk about AI, we've got young relationships that are being outsourced to a mobile phone.
And we are now moving in today's when young people are falling in love with their chatbot
And again, it sounds ridiculous to say, but it's real, and we're heading towards days, and we're already there when the robots come.
And they'll be walking amongst us, and I sound ridiculous saying it, but it is coming.
It's when we're now disembodying technology and removing the humanity.
So what do we as the church do to respond?
We move forward.
in unity with authentic humanity.
And we restore the ground of children being able to be children again.
We retake the ground of what it means to have genuine authentic relationships.
We forget digital campfires.
We get young people around campfires.
We get young people around tables again.
We get young people connected to multi-generations, learning things they will never learn from chat GPT.
The church is, you and I are called to be the embodied community, the hands and feet of Jesus to the world and to answer those questions because if we don't answer these questions of a density purpose and belonging for children, somebody else will.
And right now our children are being discipled by data and they've been discipled by an algorithm.
That is what discipleship means.
It literally means formation of spirituality and humanity.
We have abdicated responsibility and we've said that Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk and these guys can disciple our children when we are the ones who are responsible for it.
That is the God-given mandate for you and me, right?
Yes, Dave.
I mean, I hear your passion and I mirror it because
That should be our USP as chair.
That's the USP, not the USP.
Identity belonging purpose, that's what we exist for.
And church, you know, when we talk about stepping into the story, so often what we think about is ourselves.
We think about our own fulfillment.
But actually, there is a generation that needs us to be thinking about them and their fulfillment and their flourishing and their thriving.
I'm tired of asking for volunteers for kids' church.
Do you know what, why do we see that as a lesser ministry, our kids and our youth, when actually these are the ones who will be carrying the baton of faith forward, they already are.
They're representing Jesus, day in, day out.
Come on church, if this doesn't compel you to make a difference, I don't know what would.
That's it.
And there's so much hope, isn't there, in that, as we can offer things
that chatbots never can.
You know, your data does not really know you and your data does not want the best for you.
They want to hold your attention and they want to monetize that attention.
It's simple as that.
That is the purpose of all of this stuff.
If the product is free, you are the product.
And that's why we as adults have to remember that
I'm really challenged by all this stuff, because I've got to get a hold of this for myself.
So I feel challenged to be.
My wife came off social media about eight months ago, and she's had no fear of missing out, and she's better for her.
And I know we can be tech-negative, or we can be tech-positive.
I believe we need to be tech-wise in all of this.
That's great.
And I regularly take Instagram off my phone, and at the weekend, put it back on, and then my daughter just teases me, because she's like, you've got it back on again, have you, Dad?
Thanks, love.
So we've got to model something in our churches and model something in our communities and model something in our families that's different for the next generation.
And one of the big challenges is that we don't even know and understand it ourselves.
Right.
I mean, I really struggle to switch off from that.
I love communicating with people, which is a beautiful strength, but it's also a
There's a terrible underside to that, which is, you know, when you have a tool at your disposal that keeps you connected, how do you withdraw from that?
And it's something I'm learning, but I definitely don't have a handle on it all the time.
So, I'm with you.
Can I give you a hint?
Yes, please.
I went for a walk with my daughter, dear Adi, she's Janelle for 15, and I actually was honest with her about my tech use and phone use, and we had a long conversations with walking along about changes that we wanted to make.
And I think one of the best things we can do is do it together.
That's great.
I love that.
Genuinely.
And we're both making changes and we're challenged and she actually needed to hear because we all know that they spot our hypocrisy at Marloff, right?
Right.
100% unconstantly called out.
It's kind of do as I say, not as I do.
And that doesn't work in a generation of leading influencers.
Right.
Oh, we're already over time, Dave.
So I'm just trying to think about
AI, because I feel like that's so useful, but I'm also really mindful of our kids' church team.
Pete's going to go up and chat.
Let's just do this last question as fast as we can on AI, but I don't want people to miss out on that, because I feel like probably that's something that we really, really need to learn about.
So the question is this.
The final feature is this is a generation who are AI-shaped, and how can we help raise a generation who are wise
and discerning and provide them with authenticity, truth, and real human interaction in an increasingly artificial world.
Yeah, we've touched on it already, and it's such a massive question.
So I think one of the biggest things that we can do is to learn about AI and what's happening, the reality of the world.
And again, there's some incredible positive things happening.
But the world is changing at such a pace right now.
that in two or three years time we're in danger of looking back and going what happened.
So I think as Christians we've got to be ahead of the game with it.
We need to understand that our children have been now given tools to be able to say something and create worlds.
They've been given godlike powers in childlike minds.
So you can now do text to image, you can do text to story, you can do voice to video game,
voice to video.
So if I say make me a world where Pete is on his guitar running around popping balloons and it'll do it and I'll send you it later Pete and I can interact and I can play that.
So young people have been given incredible amount of power in the palm of their hands so we've got to help them learn to discern and it's not just if they can do it, it should they be and then I believe ethics is going to be at the heart of this
talk and the morality of it in the next generation, because we're going to have the tools and it's coming and it's happening.
So I would say in one short thing, and then I want to talk about Jesus to end if that's okay, is that get to know what's going on in the world of AI and help have a conversation with your children, young people again about how it's impacting them, because it is affecting absolutely everything.
And if I was to land it on Jesus, I would say this.
Come on.
Jesus is good news for Generation Alpha.
For the anxious-minded Jesus is the Prince of Peace.
For the leading influencer, Jesus is our servant king, the one who wants to lead us into his amazing kingdom.
For the pandemic impacted Jesus is Emmanuel, God with us in all of our problems and trials.
For the hyper-connected Jesus is the true vine, our real genuine source of connection.
And from the AI shapes, Jesus is our wisdom and He's our truth.
Yes to that.
Jesus is good news for every generation and He's really good news for Gen Alpha.
I really do believe that.
Can we just say it firstly, thank you, Dave?
Thanks, guys.
For condensing a labour of love into 35 minutes for us.
Secondly,
I would love us to think about how we can get hold of this book.
I would encourage everyone in our church family to read this book and I'm not saying that because I want Dave to have loads of book sales, although I do actually because it's not easy to be a creative and it's like putting your baby out there and you want everybody to read it, don't you?
Every three chairs or so, there is a postcard here, and on that postcard, there is a QR code you can sign up to pre-order Dave's book, or yes, you can zoom in right now to the screen behind me and do it that way.
Yeah.
And I think if you want to, if you get chance, if the easiest way, go on Amazon, type in raise in gen alpha.
If you pre-order it, it makes a huge difference.
If it gets on Amazon's radar, that then means they push it out more as well.
So that'd be fantastic.
Thank you.
Yay.
And for those everyone who's ordered, if you do, I will give you a personal high five this morning.
Oh, well, there you go.
If that's not an incentive, I don't know what it is.
Could we stand together, Church?
I want to finish with a quote from Dave.
Jen Alpha is the most spiritually curious generation yet, but they need a place to call home.
Listen Church, we want to become that place called home for Gen Alpha, don't we?
We want to be ready and that's going to take all of us growing, changing and making space, myself included.
I wonder, oh, he's gone.
Dave, would you just come and pray for us to become that place called home for Gen Alpha, please?
And then we're going to sing the song that Dave alluded to, Hosanna, about a generation rising up to take their place.
And for some of us, maybe God will break our hearts this morning.
We'll have our ministry team here.
If you'd like to stand with someone in prayer to take your place in discipling Jen Alpha, we would love you to do that.
Holy Spirit, we lift every Jen Alpha in this room and in our lives, in our hearts, you right now.
Holy Spirit, we ask that you would equip them with the tools to be disciples of Jesus in their generation.
Lord, you say in a word that David served the purposes of God in his generation.
Now let it be for Janal, for that they would serve the purposes of God to their generation.
We pray protection, we pray the empowering of those that need to know that Jesus is good news right now.
I pray you would raise them up to be influencers, to be leaders in the nation and in the nations of the world.
And above all, Lord, we thank you, God, that you are the God of generations.
And in line with Ephesians, we pray, Lord, that you are able to do exceedingly more than we could ever hope, dare, or dream, or imagine for the sake of the next generation.
We pray this in Jesus' name.
Amen.